I. B. Yavru et al.: SUPER: Smart User-Centric Popularity Exposure Reduction
Identifiability Consideration: We emphasize that recov-
ering a user’s causal preference for popularity from
observational interaction logs is fundamentally challenging
in the absence of impression or exposure data. Histor-
ical interactions may reflect not only genuine interest
but also visibility effects, position bias, and popularity
reinforcement.
Accordingly, SUPER does not interpret the estimated
popularity inclination as a ground-truth latent preference.
Instead, it is treated as a behavioral proxy that serves as
an operational calibration signal for controlling head–tail
exposure at the user level. This perspective aligns with
the standard offline evaluation setting commonly adopted
in popularity-bias research, where behavioral interaction
patterns are used as practical estimators of user tendencies
when exposure logs are unavailable.
D. CONSTRUCTING THE FINAL TOP-N
RECOMMENDATIONS
With the user-specific inclination Popu in hand, we produce
the final top-N recommendation list by proportionally
blending items predicted by the popular-only and tail-only
models. The code provided in the integration phase performs
the following steps:
1) Generate Predictions Separately: Using the previ-
ously trained models, we produce two sets of rating
predictions for each user:
• Popular Predictions: From the popular-only
model.
• Tail Predictions: From the tail-only model.
2) Determine User’s Proportion for Popular and Tail
Items: Given the user’s popularity inclination Popu,
we translate this ratio into a distribution for the final
top-N list. For a top-N size (e.g., N=10), if Popu =
0.3, we select N × 0.3 = 3 items from the popular
predictions and N × 0.7 = 7 items from the tail
predictions.
3) Selecting the Top Items: Using the post-processing
approach in Algorithm 2, we first compute Npop =
⌊N × Popu⌋ and Ntail = N − Npop. We then rank
the items predicted by Mpop in descending order and
choose the top Npop. Similarly, we rank the items pre-
dicted by Mtail in descending order and select the top
Ntail. By adhering to these user-specific proportions,
we ensure that each final recommendation list reflects
both the user’s inclination toward mainstream versus
niche content, and the system’s objective of blending
popular and tail items in a balanced manner.
4) Combine and Output the Final Recommendations:
Rather than simply concatenating popular and tail
selections in a static proportion, we follow a blueprint-
based merge that respects how the user historically
alternates between head and tail items. Specifically,
we retrieve the user’s real rating list Lu, sorted by
descending preference, and note the positions at which
Algorithm 1 SUPER Pre-Processing
Require: Dataset D (columns {user_id, item_id, . . .}),
Pareto threshold α (e.g., 0.20)
Ensure: Partitioned sets (D pop, Dtail) and trained models
(Mpop, Mtail)
1: threshold ← D.shape[0] × α ▷ Compute
interaction-volume threshold for head vs. tail
2: counts ← count item_id frequencies in D ▷ Number of
user interactions per item
3: sorted_counts ← sort(Counts, Desc) ▷ Rank items from
most to least popular
4: popular_items, long-tail_items ← ∅
5: total_ratings ← 0
6: for (item_id, count) ∈ sorted_counts do
7: total_ratings ← total_ratings + count
8: if total_ratings < threshold then
9: popular_items.append(item_id)
10: else
11: long-tail_items.append(item_id)
12: end if
13: end for
14: Dpop ← Filter(D, popular_items) ▷ All records for
items deemed popular
15: Dtail ← Filter(D, long-tail_items) ▷ All records for
items deemed less popular
16: Mpop ← Train(Dpop) ▷ Model specialized for head
items
17: Mtail ← Train(Dtail) ▷ Model specialized for tail items
return (Dpop, Dtail, Mpop, Mtail)
Note: The Pareto threshold is defined over cumulative
interaction volume rather than item count, ensuring
that the head set captures the items responsible for the
majority of observed user activity.
the user has historically consumed popular (head )
items versus those for which the user has opted for
niche (tail) options. Here, Lu is constructed exclusively
from the user’s observed historical interactions in the
training data and contains only items that the user
has actually rated or interacted with; it never includes
unrated or test-only items. For each position in the
top-N list, we then pull the highest-scoring candidate
from the popular or tail pool based on whether that
position is designated as head or tail in the user’s
original consumption pattern. This step ensures that
each user’s final top-N recommendations align with
their personal ratio of head-to-tail items, reflecting
the user’s observed behavioral transitions between
popular and niche content rather than enforcing a
uniform, one-size-fits-all allocation. As a result, the
system delivers a more accurate and user-centric
experience, reflecting individual popularity inclina-
tion while maintaining diverse coverage. Crucially,
VOLUME 14, 2026 37587